# outreachy_Temitope_2022
Outreachy December 2022 Contribution Phase, Moja Global.
RESEARCH DATA SOURCES FOR CARBON  SEQUESTRATION IN FORESTS.
CASE STUDY : SHASHA FOREST RESERVE, OSUN STATE,  NIGERIA.

MY INTEREST: To start with, my interest in participating in the selected project is personal. I have witnessed deforestation on a large scale growing up, I often go to ‘Sawmill’ where logs were sawn into rough-squared sections or planks and boards, but I never understood the effect on the environment until when I was much older.  With the knowledge I have now, my interest is to work with Moja Global through extensive research and data analysis to assist my country (Nigeria) in restoring our degraded forests by proposing effective software for monitoring greenhouse gas emission and removal.

CLIMATE CHANGE AND MOJA GLOBAL: Furthermore, my interest and concerns about climate change and global warming are focused extensively on the buildup of atmospheric greenhouse gases (GHC). Carbon is an important greenhouse gas with respect to its global warming influences,  and forests can store, capture and release carbon. However, carbon sequestration is the process of capture (through photosynthesis) and long term storage of atmospheric carbon dioxide (Co2). Carbon sequestration in forests is within tree biomass. More than 50% of dry tree biomass is carbon. Biomass can be any part of living or non-living tree tissue, for example,  trunk, branches, leaves and roots.  In recent years, carbon sequestration and reduced emissions from avoided deforestation have received more attention as methods to help reduce the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. And Moja Global specialization in software for monitoring greenhouse gas emission and removals from land use and land use change is an amazing initiative to support ambitious climate action by developing pioneering open-source software which will be beneficial to my country. 

NIGERIA AND CLIMATE CHANGE: Climate change effect on Nigeria is profound. Nigeria’s climate has been changing, evident in: increases in temperature, variable rainfall, rise in sea level and flooding, drought and desertification, land degradation, more frequent extreme weather events, affected fresh water resources and loss of biodiversity.  The durations and intensities of rainfall have increased, producing large runoffs and flooding in many places in Nigeria as evident  in recent months. Rainfall variation is projected to continue to increase. Precipitation in southern areas is expected to rise and rising sea levels are expected to exacerbate flooding and submersion of coastal lands.  Droughts have also become a constant in Nigeria, and are expected to continue in Northern Nigeria, arising from a decline in precipitation and rise in temperature. Lake Chad and other lakes in the country are drying up and at risk of disappearing. Temperature has risen significantly since the 1980s. Climate projections for the coming decades reveal a significant increase in temperature over all the ecological zones.

GLOBAL IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE: The global impact of climate change on forests have focused on the rising rate of locally devastating events such as forest fires, infestations, droughts and storms. The past decade saw 410 million cubic meters of wood felled in four major storms in Europe, a decade's worth of Amazonian carbon sequestration lost in severe droughts in 2005 and 2010, a record heat wave with forest fires affecting 23,000 square kilometers in Russia in 2010, and the bark beetle pandemic that has affected 130,000 square kilometers and killed 435 million cubic meters of trees in British Columbia, Canada, since 2004. Regionally, these events have had large socio-economic and ecological impacts. The windstorms that hit Europe in 1999, for example, destroyed one-third of the region's annual carbon sequestration by forests, and halved the price of timber in France and other affected.   


GLOBAL ACTION AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE: Global action against climate change,  Reducing Emission from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD) was part of the 2007 Bali Roadmap in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). An outcome of the 2010 UNFCCC Conference was an agreement for developed nations to pledge financial aid for developing countries to mitigate GHG emissions, clean energy technologies and manage forests.  The gradually expanded REDD program (REDD+) provides financial payments for investments in new forest and support for the development of systems to better administer, manage, and protect existing forested areas.

SHASHA FOREST RESERVE, OSUN STATE , NIGERIA: This research will focus extensively on Shasha Forest Reserve in Osun State, Nigeria, located in Ife South Local Government Area. Shasha Forest Reserve (SFR)SFR is located at 7.0935° N, 4.4182° E with an elevation  of 146m above sea level in Osun State, Southwestern Nigeria. It shares boundaries with Omo Forest Reserve on the west. The eastern and northern boundaries are with Oluwa Forest Reserve and Ife Native Authority Reserve in Ondo and Osun States respectively. The total size of the reserve land is currently 23,064 ha. Out of this, about 1,523 ha are under plantation of various species such as Pinus spp., Gmelina arborea, Tectona grandis, and Terminalia spp. The remaining 21,541ha is currently dominated by degraded natural forests characterized by broken canopy. The reserve is subdivided into two  major areas: Areas 4 and 5. There are about forty communities within and around the Forest Reserve. Their population ranges from 200 to 2000 inhabitants. There are reported cases of deforestation in Shasha Forest Reserve and the climate change effect is land degradation.

MITIGATION AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE: To conclude,  the best approach to sequestering carbon is afforestation. Simply planting trees on a previously unforested site, secondly, forest management with the practice to increase timber growth rates. Actions could be taken to reduce emission from forest directly by reducing deforestation and degradation particularly in the developing world like Nigeria where deforestation is rampant. 

REFERENCES
•	Haider, H., Climate change in Nigeria: Impacts and responses. K4D Helpdesk Report 675. Brighton, UK: Institute of Development Studies, 2019.

•	Valentin Bellassen &Sebastian Luyssaert, Carbon Sequestration: Managing forests in uncertain times, Nature vol 506, pp 153-155, 2014.

•	Rodger Sedjo & Brent Sohngen, Carbon Sequestration in Forests and Soils, Annual Review of Resources Economics Vol 4, pp 127-144, 2012.

